README.adoc, before:

= Lily OAS-To-Java Compiler

Lily is a compiler that consumers OpenAPI (Swagger) specifications and produces Java source code.
It is intended to be an alternative to https://github.com/OpenAPITools/openapi-generator[OpenAPI Generator], which at time of writing is the only option, and substantially more complete than Lily.

== Goals

. Generate java source code directly from an OAS document within a java build pipeline (e.g. integrated with Maven or Gradle).
. Support OAS v3.
. Target Java 17.
. Help end-users work around incorrect or incomplete schema specifications so that they can make progress while awaiting upstream fixes.
. [Tentative] Support customizable generated code, especially code which can leverage user-made JARs from unrelated projects.

== Non-Goals

. Do not (yet) support other languages than Java.
It's not clear that a Java-oriented AST will cleanly translate to another language target.
. Do not support too many options.
Options become confusing to maintain -- prefer opinionated code that works for most people who are doing sensible things.
. Do not support generate-and-check-in workflows.
Treat the OAS document as source code.

== Feature Roadmap

=== Components

==== Schemas

* [x] Map OAS types to Java stdlib types
* [x] Map arrays to Java Lists
* [x] Map objects to Java classes
* [x] Map top-level non-object components (e.g. arrays, strings) to alises
** [ ] Map aliases as their aliased type.
** [ ] (Tentative) Or, optionally map aliases as value types (wrappers around the aliased type which are serialized as the referent value only.
E.g, StringAlias serializes as a String)
* [ ] Support Jackson annotations
* [ ] Support allOf/anyOf/oneOf types

==== Responses, Parameters, Examples, Request Bodies, Headers, Security Schemes, Links, Callbacks

To do!

=== Paths, Security, Servers, Info, Tags, and External Docs

To do!

Commit message:

Use the it-project as our primary example

README.adoc, after:

= Lily OAS-To-Java Compiler

Lily is a compiler that consumes OpenAPI (Swagger) specifications and produces Java source code.
It is intended to be an alternative to https://github.com/OpenAPITools/openapi-generator[OpenAPI Generator], which at time of writing is the only option, and substantially more complete than Lily.

== Goals

. Generate java source code directly from an OAS document within a java build pipeline (e.g. integrated with Maven or Gradle).
. Support OAS v3.
. Target Java 17.
. Help end-users work around incorrect or incomplete schema specifications so that they can make progress while awaiting upstream fixes.
. [Tentative] Support customizable generated code, especially code which can leverage user-made JARs from unrelated projects.

== Non-Goals

. Do not (yet) support other languages than Java.
It's not clear that a Java-oriented AST will cleanly translate to another language target.
. Do not support too many options.
Options become confusing to maintain -- prefer opinionated code that works for most people who are doing sensible things.
. Do not support generate-and-check-in workflows.
Treat the OAS document as source code.

== Quick Tour

Lily is composed of three modules in the `modules` directory:

- `it-project` is an integration test project and living example of the compiler in action. The pom shows how to configure Lily in a maven build. The OAS shows what Lily supports. Check out the generated-sources directory under `target/` to see how it compiles OAS definitions.

- `lily-compiler-maven-plugin` is a teensy-weensy Maven plugin that reads configuration from the pom and hands it off to the compiler project.

- `compiler` is responsible for reading an OAS document, translating it to an intermediary AST (abstract syntax tree), rendering the AST as source code, and finally saving source code to disc.
